feat: trust model (#12)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/trust.rst

.. _trust.rst:

The Infrastructure of Trust
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The EUDI Wallet Architecture Reference Framework (`EIDAS-ARF`_) defines the Trust Model as a *"collection of rules that ensure the legitimacy of the components and the entities involved in the EUDI Wallet ecosystem."*.

This section defines how the Trust Model is implemented in an infrastructure of Trust based on
OpenID Connect Federation 1.0 `OIDC-FED`_, where its Federation API is used for the distribution of metadata, raw public keys, metadata policies, X.509 certificates, and their revocation statuses.

The infrastructure of Trust enables the trust assessment mechanism to be applied between the parties defined in the `EIDAS-ARF`_.

..  figure:: ../../images/trust-roles.svg
    :alt: federation portrain
    :width: 100%
    

>     The roles of the Federation infrastructure, where a Trust Anchor has one or more Intermediates and Leafs.

Reviewer: Too general. In this document we should to give a concrete architecture of trust, with the same entity's roles as in the ARF.

Author: this is the text under the image

- **Dynamic and flexible**, allowing any participant to modify parts of their metadata autonomously, as these are published within their domains and verified through the Trust Chain. Simultaneously, the Trust Anchor or its Intermediate may publish a metadata policy to dynamically modify the metadata of all participants—such as disabling a vulnerable signature algorithm—and obtain certainty of propagation within a configured period of time to all participants;
- **Efficient**, as JWT and JSON formats have been adopted on the web for years. They are cost-effective in terms of storage and processing and have a wide range of solutions available, such as libraries and software development kits, which enable rapid implementation of the solution;
- **Scalable**, the Trust Model can accommodate more than a single organization by using Intermediates;
- **Simple**, as it is based on widely used REST technology and formats that have become popular over the years.

This implementation profile
---------------------------

This document applies the OpenID Connect Federation in its original state, without any substantive changes.

> This document distinguishes between Federation Entities, which include all participants except for Wallet Instances.

Reviewer: we should map the entities defined in the OIDC-FED with the entities in the EUDIW ecosystem. For RP (I assume here that Relying Parties are the same as Verifier, isn't it?) is easy, we already have this map. For Issuers, for example?
Moreover, while in CIE SPID OIDC an intermediate operates only for RP, here we could have different kind of intermediates (for issuer and for verifier). Distinguishing them could make sense. Last point, I know that the wallet instance is not considered as a participant, this implies that the wallet provider is a leaf. How can be defined within the OIDC-FED? Final remark: we should also handle a Verifier Instance in a similar way we manage a Wallet Instance. We should think about this.

Author: for RP we have 

`openid_relying_party` and `client` according to OpenID4VP that has defined client_metadata (too much wide ...)

for issuance we have `openid-credential-issuer`

for wallet provider we have proposed with @balanza and @grausof `eidas_wallet_provider` but we may go just with `wallet_provider`

Author: I'll add this table with mapping of eudi wallet ecosystem in federation configurations

Reviewer: When you say we have `openid-credential-issuer`, exactly where is defined? The name implies that only openID Credential Issuers could exist. For credential Issuers not following the OpenID specs?

Author: It Is defined in openid4vci

Reviewer: The only reference I see is in the URI suffix of the well-known  definition. Are we implicitly saying that the suffix of the well-known uri is also used as an entity role definition as metadata type identifier in the context of OIDC-FED? They are semantically different I think.

Author: I didn't understand, what do you mean?

Reviewer: You are saying to use `openid-credential-issuer` as an entity type identifier for the Issuers, right? 
Basing on https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-federation-1_0.html#name-metadata-type-identifiers we don't have this identifier and neither in the OIDC4VCI (we have only as an URI suffix of the well-known which has a different semantic). So my question is: What you are proposing is something new (and then we have to define somewhere here) or is taken from some other spec?

Author: OIDC Federation allow the definition of any new kind of entity

![immagine](https://github.com/italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs/assets/1297620/4f223454-8599-46b7-a968-1c0f6739a73b)

Author: as we have the openid-condifuration metadata in federation's openid_provider, here we're using openid_credential_issuer in federation, taking the metadata from openid4vci

Does it convince you?

            },
            "client_metadata": {
                "vp_formats": {
                    "jwt_vp": {
                        "alg": 
                            "subset_of": [
                                "EdDSA",
                                "ES256K"
                            ]
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }

Trust Evaluation Mechanism
--------------------------

The Trust Anchor publishes the list of its Intermediates (Federation Subordinate Listing endpoint) and the attestations of their metadata and public keys (Entity Statements). 

Each participant, including Trust Anchor, Intermediate, Credential Issuer, Wallet Provider, and Relying Party, publishes its own metadata and public keys (Entity Configuration endpoint) on the well-known web resource **.well-known/openid-federation**.

Each of these can be verified using the Entity Statement issued by a superior, Trust Anchor, or Intermediate.

Each Entity Statement is verifiable over time and has an expiration date. The revocation of each statement is verifiable in real time and online (only for remote flows) through the federation endpoints.

> The concatenation of the statements, through the combination of these signing mechanisms and the binding of claims and public keys, creates the Trust Chain. This contains Trust Marks as well as protocol-specific metadata, where Trust Anchor metadata policies are applied.

Reviewer: We should also define the role of the Trust Marks in this EUDIW context. How are they used? How are they defined? Which are the main trust marks profile we consider?

Author: Before defining Trust Marks I need to have the use cases where Trust Marks are needed, since we don't have anymore the problem of the federation entity discovery abuse

|                                                    |              | Federation     |
|                                                    |              | Entity         |
|                                                    |              | Discovery      |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+----------------+
|  Trust mechanisms in a cross-domain scenario       | |check-icon| | static         |
|                                                    |              | Trust Chains   |
|                                                    |              |                |
|                                                    |              |                |
|                                                    |              |                |
|                                                    |              | Federation     |
|                                                    |              | Entity         |
|                                                    |              | Discovery      |
+----------------------------------------------------+--------------+----------------+

Federation API endpoints
------------------------

> OpenID Federation is similar to a PKI that uses RESTful Web Services secured over HTTPs. The technical specification defines which are the web endpoints that the participants made publicly available. In the table below the summary of these and their scopes.

Author: ```suggestion
OpenID Connect Federation is similar to a PKI that uses RESTful Web Services secured over HTTPs. OpenID Connect Federation defines which are the web endpoints that the participants made publicly available. In the table below the summary of these and their scopes.
```

|                           |                                              |issuance (validity) of a Trust  |  Intermediate   |
|                           |                                              |Mark related to a specific      |                 |
|                           |                                              |subject.                        |                 |
+---------------------------+----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------+
| historical keys           | **GET**                                      |Lists its expired and revoked   |  Trust Anchor   |
|                           |                                              |keys, with the motivation of the|  Intermediate   |
|                           | .well-known/openid-federation-historical-jwks|revocation.                     |                 |
|                           |                                              |                                |                 |
+---------------------------+----------------------------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------+

> All the responses of the Federation endpoints are JWS, with the exceptions for the **Subordinate Listing endpoint** and the **Trust Mark Status endpoint** that are served as plain JSON by default, however it may be signed if required.

Author: ```suggestion
All the responses of the Federation endpoints are JWS, with the exception of the **Subordinate Listing endpoint** and the **Trust Mark Status endpoint** that are served as plain JSON by default, however these may be signed if required.
```

                "federation_list_endpoint": "https://registry.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/list/",
                "federation_trust_mark_status_endpoint": "https://registry.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/trust_mark_status/"
            }
        },
        "trust_marks_issuers": {
            "https://registry.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/openid_relying_party/public/": [
                "https://registry.spid.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/",
                "https://public.intermediary.spid.org/"
            ],
    "https://registry.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/openid_relying_party/private/": [
                "https://registry.spid.eidas.trust-anchor.example.eu/",
                "https://private.other.intermediary.org/"
            ]
        },
        "constraints": {
            "max_path_length": 1
        }
    }

Entity Configuration
--------------------

The Entity Configuration is the verifiable document that each Federation Entity must publish on its own behalf, which its signature is verified with the public keys published by its Accreditation Body (Trust Anchor or Intermediate). 

> The Entity Configuration must be cryptographycally signed, and it must be verified with one of the public keys contained within it and one of the public keys within the Entity Statement issued by the Trust Anchor or its Intermediate.

Author: ```suggestion
The Entity Configuration is the verifiable document that each Federation Entity must publish on its own behalf.
The Entity Configuration must be cryptographycally signed, and it must be verified with one of the public keys contained within it and one of the public keys within the Entity Statement issued by the Trust Anchor or its Intermediate.
```

The Entity Configuration may also contain one or more Trust Marks.

Entity Configuration Signature
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> All the signature-check operations regarding the Entity Configurations, Entity Statements and Trust Marks, are carried out with the Federation public keys. For the supported algorithms refer to Section `Cryptografic Algorithm`.

Author: ```suggestion
.. note::
  **Entity Configuration Signature**

  All the signature-check operations regarding the Entity Configurations, Entity Statements and Trust Marks, are carried out with the Federation public keys. For the supported algorithms refer to Section `Cryptografic Algorithm`.
```

|                  |                             |              |
| Credential Issuer| ``federation_entity``       |              |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  | ``openid_credential_issuer``| `OPENID4VCI`_|
+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+
|                  |                             |              |
| Relying Party    | ``federation_entity``       |              |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  | ``wallet_verifier``         | `OIDC-FED`_  |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  |                             | `OpenID4VP`_ |
+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+

.. note::
    Wallet Provider metadata is defined in the section below.

    `Wallet Solution section <wallet-solution.html>`_. 

Entity Statements
-----------------

Trust Anchors and Intermediates publish an Entity Statement related to a Subordinate.
The Entity Statement MAY contain a metadata policy and the Trust Marks related to a Subordinate.

> The metadata policy one or more changes to be applied to the final metadata of the Leaf. The final metadata of a Leaf is derived from the Trust Chain that contains all the statements, starting from the Entity Configuration up to the Trust Anchor.

Author: ```suggestion
The metadata policy, when applied, makes one or more changes to the final metadata of the Leaf. The final metadata of a Leaf is derived from the Trust Chain that contains all the statements, starting from the Entity Configuration up to the Trust Anchor.
```

Trust Anchors and Intermediates must expose the Federation Fetch endpoint, where the Entity Statements are requested to validate the Leaf's Entity Configurations signatures. 

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Trust Anchors and Intermediates must expose the Federation Fetch endpoint, where the Entity Statements are requested to validate the Leaf's Entity Configurations signature. 

```

                    "x5c": [ <X.509 certificate> ]
                }
            ]
        },
        "metadata_policy": {
            "openid_relying_party": {
                "scope": {
                    "subset_of": [
                         "eu.europa.ec.eudiw.pid.1",  
                         "eu.europa.ec.eudiw.pid.1:given_name",
                         "email"
                      ]
                },
               "request_authentication_methods_supported": {
                "one_of": ["request_object"]
                },
               "request_authentication_signing_alg_values_supported": {
                    "subset_of": ["RS256", "RS512", "ES256", "ES512", "PS256", "PS512"]
               }
            },
            "client": {
                "vp_formats": {
                    "jwt_vp": {
                        "alg":
                            "subset_of": [
                                "EdDSA",
                                "ES256K"
                            ]
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }

Entity Statement Signature
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The same considerations and requirements made for the Entity Configuration must be applied for the Entity Statements.

Author: ```suggestion
.. note::

  **Entity Statement Signature**

  The same considerations and requirements made for the Entity Configuration must be applied for the Entity Statements.
```

     "eyJhbGciOiJFUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImVVRldSakJKYlhVeU5TMHRhV1JrYlhCMWVURlBjazV6UzBGRVFTMWFNVFpEYTNOWk1WUktURTR5Y3ciLCJ0eXAiOiJhcHBsaWNhdGlvbi9lbnRpdHktc3RhdGVtZW50K2p3dCJ9.eyJleHAiOjE2NDk2MjM1NDYsImlhdCI6MTY0OTQ1MDc0NiwiaXNzIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly90cnVzdC1hbmNob3IuZXhhbXBsZS5ldSIsInN1YiI6Imh0dHBzOi8vaW50ZXJtZWRpYXRlLmVpZGFzLmV4YW1wbGUub3JnIiwiandrcyI6eyJrZXlzIjpbeyJrdHkiOiJFQyIsImtpZCI6IlFWUnVXSE5FWTJzMFdHNW5hSHB3VjJKVGRtd3hiRUpVY2pCdk9FeHNWMFExT0dnMFZWQnhhbTUyT0EiLCJjcnYiOiJQLTI1NiIsIngiOiJCR1VOOXN6ZG0xT1RxVWhUQ3JkcWRmQjhtTUJqb2JCYk5Nd2JxZnd4c3pZIiwieSI6IkdnMUhCNGVJRWJhQjA4NEJiUW5QX0lseFJZYTNhVVRHSTF0aW5qTmVSdmMifV19LCJ0cnVzdF9tYXJrcyI6W3siaWQiOiJodHRwczovL3RydXN0LWFuY2hvci5leGFtcGxlLmV1L2ZlZGVyYXRpb25fZW50aXR5L3RoYXQtcHJvZmlsZSIsInRydXN0X21hcmsiOiJleUpoYiBcdTIwMjYifV19.KR2oBDMfqLGCZ2ZqN0FgOP7cWsW4ClxBaj4-j_c3HC-YEecK6SLlNk00bGqoEe2NCMy2lqk9dYQO1IauB_ZG7A"
    ]

> .. note:
>     The entire Trust Chain is verifiable by possessing only the Trust Anchor’s public key.

Author: ```suggestion
.. note::

    The entire Trust Chain is verifiable by possessing only the Trust Anchor’s public key.
```

Offline Trust Attestation Mechanisms
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this section, we describe the implementation requirements to enable
offline trust evaluation mechanisms.

.. note::
  The offline flows do not allow for real-time evaluation of an Entity's status, such as its revocation. At the same time, using short-lived Trust Chains enables the attainment of trust attestations compatible with the required revocation administrative protocols (e.g., a revocation must be propagated in less than 24 hours, thus the Trust Chain must not be valid for more than that period).

Offline EUDI Wallet Trust Attestation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Given that a mobile device should not publish its metadata online at the *.well-known/openid-federation* endpoint, or in any other way, it is not mandatory for the EUDI Wallet to publish its metadata if the User does not want this. As a result, the EUDI Wallet does not need to publish its federation metadata online.

Author: ```suggestion
Given that a mobile device should not publish its metadata online at the *.well-known/openid-federation* endpoint, or in any other way, it is not mandatory for the Wallet Instance to publish its metadata if the User does not want this. As a result, the Wallet Instance does not need to publish its federation metadata online.
```

> However, the EUDI Wallet can still obtain a Wallet Attestation Instance issued by its Wallet Provider, which should contain a Trust Chain related to its issuer (Wallet Provider).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
However, the Wallet Instance should obtain a Wallet Attestation Instance issued by its Wallet Provider, which should contain a Trust Chain related to its issuer (Wallet Provider).

```

Offline Relying Party Metadata
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Since the Federation Entity Discovery is only applicable in online scenarios, it is possible to include the Trust Chain in the presentation requests that a Relying Party may issue for an EUDI Wallet.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Since the Federation Entity Discovery is only applicable in online scenarios, it is possible to include the Trust Chain in the presentation requests that a Relying Party may issue for a Wallet Instance.

```

The Relying Party must sign the presentation request, which should include the `trust_chain` claim in its header parameter, containing the Federation Trust Chain related to itself.

The Wallet Instance that verifies the request issued by the Relying Party can then use the Trust Anchor public keys to validate the entire Trust Chain related to the Relying Party and attest to its reliability.

> Furthermore, the Wallet Instance can apply the metadata policy, if available, to filter out any User attributes not attested in the trusted metadata from the Relying Party's request, which is obtained from the Trust Chain.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the Wallet Instance applies the metadata policy, if available, to filter out any User attributes not attested in the Relying Party metadata, as derived from the Trust Chain made available in the Relying Party's signed request.
```

Non-repudiability of the Long Lived Attestations
--------------------------------------------------

The Trust Anchor and its Intermediate MUST expose the Historical keys endpoint, where are published all the public keys that are no longer used, whether expired or revoked.

The details of this endpoint are defined in the `OIDC-FED`_ Section 7.6.

Each JWS containing a Trust Chain in the form of a JWS header parameter can be verified over time, since the entire Trust Chain is verifiable using the Trust Anchor's public key.

Even if the Trust Anchor has changed its cryptographic keys for digital signature, the historical keys endpoint always makes the keys no longer used available for historical signature verifications.

Privacy Considerations
----------------------

> - EUDI Wallet Instances do not publish their metadata through an online service.

Author: ```suggestion
- Wallet Instances do not publish their metadata through an online service.
```

- The trust infrastructure is public, with all endpoints publicly accessible without any client credentials that may disclose who is requesting access.

> - When a Wallet requests the Entity Statements to build the Trust Chain for a specific Relying Party or validates a Trust Mark online, issued for a specific Relying Party, the Trust Anchor or its Intermediate do not know that a particular Wallet is inquiring about a specific Relying Party; instead, they only serve the statements related to that Relying Party as a public resource.

Author: ```suggestion
- When a Wallet Instance requests the Entity Statements to build the Trust Chain for a specific Relying Party or validates a Trust Mark online, issued for a specific Relying Party, the Trust Anchor or its Intermediate do not know that a particular Wallet Instance is inquiring about a specific Relying Party; instead, they only serve the statements related to that Relying Party as a public resource.
```

> - The metadata of the EUDI Wallet instance must not contain information that may disclose technical information about the hardware used.

Author: ```suggestion
- The Wallet instance metadata must not contain information that may disclose technical information about the hardware used.
```

+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+
| Intermediate     | ``federation_entity``       | `OIDC-FED`_  |
+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+
|                  |                             |              |
| Wallet Provider  | ``federation_entity``       | --           |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  | ``wallet_provider``         |              |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  |                             |              |
+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+
|                  |                             |              |
| Credential Issuer| ``federation_entity``       |              |
|                  |                             |              |
|                  | ``openid_credential_issuer``| `OPENID4VCI`_|
+------------------+-----------------------------+--------------+
|                  |                             |              |
| Relying Party    | ``federation_entity``       |              |
|                  |                             |              |

> |                  | ``wallet_verifier``         | `OIDC-FED`_  |

Author: ```suggestion
|                  | ``wallet_relying_party``    | `OIDC-FED`_  |
```

                            "subset_of": [
                                "EdDSA",
                                "ES256K"
                            ]
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }

.. note::

  **Entity Statement Signature**

  The same considerations and requirements made for the Entity Configuration must be applied for the Entity Statements.

Entity Statement
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Entity Statement issued by Trust Anchors and Intermediates contain the following attributes:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - **Claim**
     - **Description**
     - **Required**
   * - **iss**
     - See `OIDC-FED`_ Section 3.1 for further details.
     - |check-icon|
   * - **sub**
     - See `OIDC-FED`_ Section 3.1 for further details.
     - |check-icon|
   * - **iat**
     - See `OIDC-FED`_ Section 3.1 for further details.
     - |check-icon|
   * - **exp**
     - See `OIDC-FED`_ Section 3.1 for further details.
     - |check-icon|
   * - **jwks**
     - Federation JWKS of the *sub* entity. See `OIDC-FED`_ Section 3.1 for further details.
     - |check-icon|
   * - **metadata_policy**

>      - JSON Object that describes the Metadata policy. Each key of the JSON Object represents an        identifier of the type of Metadata and each value MUST be a JSON Object that represents the Metadata policy according to that Metadata type. Please refer to the `OIDC-FED`_ specifications, Section-5.1, for the implementation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - JSON Object that describes the Metadata policy. Each key of the JSON Object represents an identifier of the type of Metadata and each value MUST be a JSON Object that represents the Metadata policy according to that Metadata type. Please refer to the `OIDC-FED`_ specifications, Section-5.1, for the implementation details.
```

    ]

.. note::

    The entire Trust Chain is verifiable by possessing only the Trust Anchor’s public key.

Offline Trust Attestation Mechanisms
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this section, we describe the implementation requirements to enable
offline trust evaluation mechanisms.

.. note::
  The offline flows do not allow for real-time evaluation of an Entity's status, such as its revocation. At the same time, using short-lived Trust Chains enables the attainment of trust attestations compatible with the required revocation administrative protocols (e.g., a revocation must be propagated in less than 24 hours, thus the Trust Chain must not be valid for more than that period).

Offline EUDI Wallet Trust Attestation

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Given that a mobile device should not publish its metadata online at the *.well-known/openid-federation* endpoint, or in any other way, it is not mandatory for the Wallet Instance to publish its metadata if the User does not want this. As a result, the Wallet Instance does not need to publish its federation metadata online.

However, the Wallet Instance should obtain a Wallet Attestation Instance issued by its Wallet Provider, which should contain a Trust Chain related to its issuer (Wallet Provider).

Offline Relying Party Metadata

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```
